# Page 133 53-Year-Old Man from Malawi With a Chronic Cough Clinical Presentation History 53-year-old Malawian man presents to a local hospital with a productive cough and whitish sputum for 3 months. He also reports night sweats and some weight loss, which he is unable to quantify. Two months earlier he presented to a health centre with the same complaints. He was given presumptive antimalar-ials and amoxicillin for 5 days, but to no avail. The patient is not aware of any tuberculosis (TB) con-tacts. He is currently not on any medication and his past medical history is unremarkable. He is a subsistence farmer. He has never worked in a mine or in the construction indus-try. He is a non-smoker. He is married with five children; all are well. Clinical Findings 53-year-old man, slightly wasted. Temperature 38.8°C (101.8°F), blood pressure 100/80mmHg, pulse 88bpm, oxygen saturation 97% on ambient air. He appears mildly anaemic. On inspection of his mouth there is no oral thrush, no Kaposi’s sarcoma and no oral hairy leukoplakia. His chest is clear and there are normal heart sounds without any mur-murs. There is no lymphadenopathy; liver and spleen are not enlarged. Investigations The HIV-test is reactive. His further laboratory results are shown in Table 33.1. Chest Radiography His chest radiograph on admission shows a prominent hilar region bilaterally but is otherwise normal (Fig. 33.1). 33 53-Year-Old Man from Malawi With a Chronic Cough # Page 3 The patient was treated for a possible bacterial chest infec-tion, covering also for Gram-negative bacteria. He received ceftriaxone 2g od and erythromycin 500mg qid for 5 days. It was decided not to treat him for PCP and he received the prophylactic dose of co-trimoxazole (480mg bid according to local national guidelines). Nonetheless, his fever persisted, even though the cough subjectively improved slightly. On day 7 in the hospital, the patient was started on empir-ical treatment for smear-negative TB with four antitubercu-lous drugs (Isoniazid (H), Rifampicin (R), Pyrazinamide (P) and Ethambutol (E). After the first week of treatment, he started to feel better. His fever went down and the cough gradually settled. He was discharged home. Three weeks into the TB treatment he was seen at the HIV clinic. He was doing well and had started antiretroviral therapy. SUMMARY BOX Tuberculosis in HIV-Infected Patients TB and HIV infection are the most important ‘tropical’ diseases in adults in many parts of sub-Saharan Africa. Co-infection with HIV and TB is common and poses a particular challenge to the clinician. Clinical presentation of TB changes with declining peripheral CD4 counts (Table 33.2). Cavitating smear-positive pulmonary TB, as seen classically in HIV-negative individuals, is uncommon in advanced immuno-suppression. Instead, patients more commonly present with sputum smear-negative pulmonary TB. CXR may be completely normal and clinical symptoms are often discrete; patients may produce little sputum and haemoptysis is rare. HIV-positive individuals are also more likely to present with extrapulmonary TB manifesting as pleural effusion, pericardial disease, lymph node TB, abdominal TB, TB meningitis and miliary disease or a combination of these (Fig. 33.2). Severe anaemia is a common clinical clue to a co-infection with HIV/TB and reflects bone marrow involvement. When treating HIV/TB co-infected patients, pharmacokinetic interactions between rifampicin and antiretroviral drugs have to be considered. Adding prednisolone during the first 4 weeks of antituberculous treatment may help decrease the risk of immune-reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS).
