# Page 179 34-Year-Old Male Immigrant from Peru With Chronic Diarrhoea and Severe Weight Loss Clinical Presentation History 34-year-old man presents to a hospital in Chile with a 6-month history of severe chronic diarrhoea associated with colicky abdominal pain and weight loss of approximately 20 kg. For more than 12 years he has suffered from recur-rent episodes of diarrhoea and abdominal cramps; the fre-quency of these episodes appears to have increased in the past 2 years. The patient originates from northern Peru but has been living in Chile for the past 9 years. He reports that his Peru-vian wife and children are healthy, but that his mother and one brother suffered from chronic abdominal symptoms of unknown origin, leading to wasting and subsequent death at the age of 45 and 28 years, respectively. Clinical Findings The patient is cachectic with a severe loss of muscle mass and a body weight of 44 kg (BMI 17). Apart from slight pain on abdominal palpation, the physical examination is normal: He is afebrile, liver and spleen are not enlarged, there is no palpable lymphadenopathy and no peripheral oedema. Laboratory results His laboratory results on admission are shown in Table 79.1. Other Investigations Abdominal scan and abdominal are without any pathological findings. Oesophagogastroduodenoscopy appeared macroscopically normal. Histology of a duodenal biopsy is shown in 79 A 34-Year-Old Male Immigrant from Peru With Chronic Diarrhoea and Severe Weight Loss # Page 3 SUMMARY BOX HTLV-1-Associated Strongyloides stercoralis Hyperin-fection Syndrome S. stercoralis is a soil-transmitted nematode, capable of main-taining chronic intestinal infection through a cycle of auto-infection. It is a poverty-associated neglected disease, endemic in most tropical and subtropical regions worldwide. Strongyloidiasis is not unusual in returning travellers, who typically present with non-specific gastrointestinal complaints and/or eosinophilia (see Case 20). In immunocompromised patients, the parasite may multiply massively, resulting in severe and potentially fatal com-plications, commonly called “hyperinfection syndrome”. Corti-costeroids play a major role as a risk factor for strongyloides hyperinfection syndrome. In addition, HTLV-1 infection is an important predisposing condition. HTLV-1 is a neglected retrovirus, which is primarily transmitted by breastfeeding, but also by sexual contact and blood products. It causes a Th1-predominant T-cell proliferation and a marked shift towards type 1 cytokines. This immunological imbalance affects the Th2-mediated control of S. stercoralis, with the risk of accelerated auto-infection leading to increased loads of Stron-gyloides adults and larvae. In HIV/AIDS, T-cell response is shifted towards Th2 cytokines; therefore HIV infection is not usually associated with strongyloides hyperinfection syndrome, even though some cases have been described, e.g. in the context of immune reconstitution inflam-matory syndrome (IRIS). HTLV-1-associated S. stercoralis hyperinfection syndrome mostly presents as severe chronic diarrhoea, malabsorption, and wasting. Disseminated forms, which are characterized by inva-sion of extraintestinal tissues (apart from the lung passage of larvae), a more rapid progress and a high lethality, are more typically found in patients under corticosteroid therapy. Because patients with hyperinfection lack common hallmarks of strongy-loidiasis, such as eosinophilia and elevated IgE levels, diagnosis is often delayed or missed. The drug of choice for patients with strongyloides hyperin-fection syndrome is ivermectin given over prolonged periods of time (e.g. 7 days for two or more cycles). Patients with signs of dissemination (e.g. larvae in urine) should be treated with iver-mectin and albendazole in combination with broad-spectrum antibiotics to prevent Gram-negative infections (e.g. sepsis or meningitis) commonly associated with larval dissemination. Management can be challenging in severely ill patients inca-pable of resorbing ivermectin from the gastrointestinal tract, e.g. in paralytic ileus, because no parenteral anthelminthic drugs are licensed for use in humans. However, parenteral ivermectin is commonly administered in veterinary medicine and some case reports describe successful subcutaneous treatment with a vet-erinary formulation of the drug. Because treatment failures might occur, patients require close follow-up. Family members should be screened for both S. stercoralis and HTLV-1 infection. Patients originating from endemic countries should be screened for Strongyloides infection before initiation of any immunosuppres-sive therapy.
