# Page 194 20-Year-Old Woman from the Democratic Republic of the Congo With Fever and a Vesiculopustular Skin Rash Clinical Presentation History 20-year-old woman presents to her local hospital in a rural area of the Democratic Republic of the Congo with a history of fever, malaise, headache, dry cough, swelling of the neck and a disseminated skin rash, which appeared 2 days after the symptoms began. The skin lesions first appeared on the face and then spread centrifugally over her body, including the palms and soles of her feet as well as the oral mucosa. The lesions have developed from initial macules to papules, then to vesicles and finally to pustules. The oral mucosal lesions are painful and make drinking and eating difficult. The patient resides in a village, where people live from agriculture, she has no relevant past medical history and is the mother of three children. Clinical Findings Vital signs: temperature 38°C (100.4°F), pulse 110 beats per minute, blood pressure 105/82 mmHg. Disseminated uni-form umbilicated vesiculopustular skin lesions, ranging from 0.5 to 1 cm in diameter, all over the body with a predilection for the face, the hands and the feet (Fig. 94.1). Generalized lymphadenopathy with prominent swelling of the cervical lymph nodes. The examination of the lungs, heart, abdomen and the is unremarkable. Laboratory Results See Table 94.1 Table 94.2). The Case Continued… Currently, no specific vaccine or treatment for monkeypox is available and clinical management is exclusively supportive. Persons who have been vaccinated against smallpox in the past appear to have some cross-protection against monkey-pox; and if they get infected, develop milder symptoms than unvaccinated persons. Our patient is 20 years old, and was thus born after the worldwide smallpox vaccination 94 20-Year-Old Woman from the DRC with Fever and a Skin Rash # Page 3 programmes were stopped in the early 1980s. She made an uneventful recovery; however, with scarring from the skin lesions (Fig. 94.2). SUMMARY BOX Human Monkeypox Human monkeypox is a sporadic smallpox-like zoonotic viral exanthematous disease. It occurs in the rain forests of Central and West Africa. The virus was first identified in 1958 in laboratory monkeys. Human monkeypox was not recognized as a distinct infection in humans until 1970. Then, during efforts to eradicate smallpox, the virus was isolated from a patient with suspected smallpox infection in Zaire (now the Democratic Republic of the Congo). Although the natural animal reservoir of monkeypox remains unknown, several lines of evidence point to rodents as a likely reservoir. The sporadically observed human cases and small outbreaks are confined to remote villages and believed to result from close contact between humans and wild animals. However, the precise exposure is often difficult to pinpoint in areas where contact with animals through household rodent infestations and hunting or preparation of bushmeat from a variety of species is common. Outside endemic areas, there was an outbreak of monkeypox in the United States in 2003 associated with infected prairie dogs sold as pets. Although considerably less infective than smallpox, monkey-pox can also spread from human to human through the respi-ratory route or by contact with an infected person’s bodily fluids. Transmission is believed to occur through saliva and respiratory secretions or contact with exudate or crust material from the skin lesions. Risk factors for transmission include sharing a bed or room or using the same utensils as an infected person. The clinical picture of monkeypox is similar to smallpox but shows a considerably milder course with a case fatality rate of 10%. It is believed that the rising number of reported human cases in recent years is largely attributable to the waning herd immunity after the suspension of smallpox vaccination in the early 1980s. In endemic regions, the fairly distinct rash of monkeypox is primarily a clinical diagnosis because neither commercial assays nor the required laboratory infrastructure are usually readily available. The definitive diagnosis is established by PCR, culture, immunohistochemistry or electron microscopy but demands biosafety level 2 laboratory facilities. Optimal diagnostic speci-mens for PCR are lesion exudate on a swab or crust specimens (stored in a dry, sterile tube without any transport media and kept cold). Interpretation of serological tests can be hampered by cross-reactivity with other orthopoxviruses including previous smallpox vaccination.
